1.2 for the hearing of evidence, um,
for the inquiry into harm,
young New Zealanders encounter online
and the roles that government, business
and society should play in addressing those harms.
Um, we have our first, um, fearing this morning
with control plus, plus shift.
We are on Zoom,
so we're going to Dr.
Emma. Yeah, right. Okay. Not on my agenda.
Alright. But we're going to Dr. Emma, um, also on Zoom.
Hello? Can you hear me? Yeah, we can. Dr.
Emma, we have, um, 10 minutes with you this morning,
including, um, time for questions.
If you'd allow us, um, some time
for questions, that'd be great. Hand over to you.
Thank you so much to the chair as well as the committee.
It's an honor to be here with you.
My name's Dr. Emma Bryant.
I'm a visiting associate professor at Notre Dame University
in the United States, and I researched propaganda
and information warfare
and how they exploit new technologies.
Um, I was, uh, my, my work has been best known
for its significant role in exposing the Cambridge Analytica
and Facebook scandal in 2018.
And the threats like this have only worsened since
restricting under sixteens from social media.
May seem like a very sensible idea in that context.
After all, the online harms are very real.
But my experience has shown me that this is not a solution
that protects future generations.
Kids at 16
or two years away from voting,
that would give them just two years to come up
to speed on digital literacy
and understand how to navigate a deceptive
and manipulative environment
that even adults struggle, struggle with every day.
With a ban, you limit their opportunity to learn.
They need to develop literacy
and privacy oriented behaviors supported by parents
and in schools to enable this technology needs
to be designed to allow their generation's emerging use
and safe use for adults.
This won't happen if, um, if, uh, schools
and parents are unable to prepare them for the future
of the internet, our social world.
And who are these kids? You might be considering banning
from much of the internet.
Not everyone would be held back equally.
Some kids become parents before 16. Some kids are carers.
Some kids, myself included, had to leave home before 16
and raise themselves outside of the care system.
Imagine how I would've feared, uh, fared
as a 15-year-old in today's digital world if half the
Internet's, uh, resources were also denied.
To me, policies like this fail to anticipate the social
and informational needs of the most vulnerable kids,
navigating challenging circumstances like these in an online
networked, digitally dependent world.
What's more to verify age, you need
to require the most incredibly sensitive data
to be shared by all users.
There's a very real threat posed by fascists today,
seeking public office in
democratic elections around the world.
Their aim is to exploit government
and industry data for authoritarian purposes.
And many among the tech elite want to help them.
Solutions that usher in a normalized surveillance
and data sharing of this kind
for the next generation make the very unsafe assumption
that this could not happen here.
Um, meanwhile,
age ramification will erode the public's healthy resistance
to sharing extremely personal and sensitive information.
A ban for kids would create the illusion
of safety while social media companies
continue their toxic business practices
and kids are left woefully unprepared.
The parliament's focus should be
to require platforms are made safer for all citizens
and ensure digital literacy for guidance for parents
and schools that encourages privacy oriented behaviors.
Now thank you again. I look forward
to the questions that you have.
Thank you very much,
Vanessa Wiener.
Uh, thank you very much for that, Emma.
Um, so you, um, talk about some of the business practices
and predatory behaviors of some
of the social media companies, for example.
Have you, um, got some good examples of any of those?
Uh, well, the Cambridge Analytica example, obviously as a,
a major one, but we're seeing a, you know, grooming of, um,
young people for, uh, by extremist groups all the time.
And I think it's, uh, one
of the problems is also the targeting of, um, ads
to young people.
If you look even at, um, the, uh, protections
that have been put into place in the eu, this leaves gaps
and, uh, new, um, uh, chat, GPT
and new other, um, AI tools are, um, facilitating people
who want to target youngsters with all sorts of really
concerning harms.
Also, the environment online itself, the algorithms
that we have, um, uh, that, that are being deployed are
manipulative anyway
and, um, have been shown to, um, you know, impact, um,
young people's, um, uh, neurological development
and psychological, uh, health.
Um, but that's also is something we are seeing in adults.
And I, my view is
that we should be making the platform safer for everybody.
Thank you. Thank you Pji Palmer. Um,
Thank you ma for your submission.
Um, just curious to know, uh,
how much can we rely on tech companies to kind
of self-regulate
and, uh, remove contents which are not safe
for younger people and, uh, kind
of leave it to tech companies?
Well, we can't, yeah, it would be my simple answer.
Um, uh, but I don't think that that means that, um,
a blanket ban is the solution.
I do think that there's a role for, um, uh,
governments in terms of regulation, uh,
but that this should be much more targeted.
Um, I think for instance, treating all, um,
social media sites like they are the same as PornHub,
for example, um, is unhelpful.
Um, and I think there need to be more targeted solutions
because actually what those social media, um,
companies are doing is very often, um, you know,
the algorithms are, um, feeding this kind of content
to people who are not even seeking it, right?
So we need to be thinking about how the algorithms work
and making those algorithms safer for everybody.
We don't all want porn bots, uh,
every time we go onto a social media platform.
And this is something that the, um,
social media companies can be forced to regular, uh, to,
um, to act upon.
Uh, I'm gonna go to full trial for now. Full.
Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
Um, what's your view on requiring algorithmic transparency
of the social media companies?
I would say that it's essential, um, for, you know,
any kind of regulation and, um, enforcement actions.
Um, you have to be able to know what, um,
the algorithms are doing.
Um, and I would be very supportive of, of, um, efforts
to ensure, um, algorithmic transparency.
Thank you. Par, did you have another start? Yeah.
I very quickly want to understand
because, uh, Emma, as you're saying that, um, there needs
to be kind of a middle ground.
And if you could elaborate on that, uh, what
that middle ground would look like, what are the kind
of platforms you think can be off limit
and, uh, what needs to be,
how the regulation can play a role
or what kind of intervention, uh, can be
provided by government?
I mean, I think that, uh, one of the problems is that, um,
we don't really know enough about the specific effects on
children, um, of what these algorithms, um, pro,
you know, produce and the specific
harms of different platforms.
And a lot of that is because the platforms are not sharing
enough data with us as researchers to be able
to look into this and develop, um, more targeted responses.
So what is needed is actually for more research
to be taking place, uh, for there to be a development of,
of much more targeted responses
that treat these companies differently as they actually are.
Um, that may maybe their solutions
for some companies might be about the algorithms.
Others it might be about, um, trying to, you know,
restrict them completely, right?
Um, uh, but I think that the problem is, uh,
a blanket ban is not the solution. Okay, thanks.
Other questions from members? Thanks, Phil.
Yeah, just I wondered, um, what,
what do you think about the idea
of exposing internet service providers
and, um, online provi content providers
to the full force of, uh, public liability under,
under the legal system so
that they become in a way liable in exactly the same way,
say that newspaper publishers are
for the content that they publish?
Well, I do think that, uh, for countries like New Zealand,
there has to be a different approach to
what we're seeing in the United States, which is, uh,
you know, obviously a free for all.
Um, and I think, uh, New Zealand needs
to be working also in, um, uh, you know, coordination
with other countries in order to pressure, uh,
these companies in this kind of way
and liability may be necessary.
Indeed. Um, I think that the problem is at the moment, um,
Trump is going to be trying to hold countries
to ransom when it comes to, um, you know, any, any, um,
actions they're taking on against big tech companies.
We've seen that also with Europe, um, the way that in,
in which they're saying, well, tariffs if you, you know, or,
or other, other restrictions on, on mobility,
for instance, for meps.
Um, but I think, you know, countries have
to be fighting back and I think the legal system is exactly
the kind of way to do that.
Thanks so much. Um, Dr. Emma Bryan, we appreciate,
uh, your time this morning.
Um, thank you for joining us. Thank you.
We're gonna, uh, invite Youthline Auckland via Zoom.
I think we've got Liz, um, Hosking Clement, who is
presenting to us on behalf of Uline
Moderna, Liz.
Um, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions over to you.
Great. Thank you so much, uh, Koto
and thank you for the opportunity to contribute
to this really important inquiry into the harm
of young people in the New Zealand encounter online.
I'm here today on behalf of youthline,
an organization recognized
as a leader in the youth development, mental health
and wellbeing sectors.
For over 55 years,
Youthline has supported young people across our,
our vision is that young people are empowered
within their communities.
We imagine a future in al
where every young person feels a sense of belonging
and where their dignity, manner,
and rights are respected today.
We bring their voices and our
expertise directly to this committee.
While our focus is on young people, we believe
that everyone deserves to be safe online,
a safer digital environment for all
strengthens the wellbeing of young people and their whanau.
We bring a unique and critical frontline perspective
to understanding the complex relationship
between online activity and youth wellbeing.
Our submission draws on thousands of annual contacts
with young people through our services.
Each year. Young people,
Inoa are telling us clearly online harm is real,
but banning social media is not the solution.
In our 2023 State of the Generation report.
While young people highlighted social media
as a key issue facing their generation, they also told us
that social media was the space they wanted our service
to be available through to access support.
They have told us that they're deeply affected
by social comparison, misinformation,
and algorithm driven exposure to harmful content.
But they also say that social media can be a lifeline,
a space where they learn,
express themselves, and seek support.
When traditional services
or supports are out of reach,
youthline does not support a blanket ban on social
media for under sixteens.
Not only are bans extremely difficult to enforce,
they risk pushing young people towards unregulated
and more harmful platforms.
They could also cut off critical pathways to connection,
identity and support, especially for those already, uh,
experiencing existing mental health concerns, those
that are rainbow, identifying young people in care
and those in rural or isolated communities.
Instead, we urge the committee
to focus on evidence-based systemic change.
What's needed is not exclusion,
but education and safer design.
We recommend the following actions are taken
enforcing stronger regulation of digital platforms,
including mandatory content moderation,
algorithm transparency
and safety by design measures a review
of the Harmful Digital Communications Act.
As well overdue, we need to support long-term reform
that prioritizes platform safety and youth rights.
We need to embed digital
and media literacy in the
curriculum starting in primary school.
And young people need the tools
to critically navigate misinformation, harmful content,
and the influence of algorithms.
We need to support our parents
and caregivers, especially those
with lower digital literacy, through accessible,
culturally relevant resources
and not just complex digital control tools.
We need to include young people in decision making,
policy development, and platform co-design.
Their insight is not only valid, it is essential.
Finally, we recognize
that online harm doesn't happen in a vacuum.
It reflects broader issues like inequality, climate anxiety,
academic pressure, and systemic racism.
Digital safety must be a whole of system response
to our youth and their wellbeing.
YOUTHLINE stands ready
to work alongside government tech companies, whanau
and young people to co-create safer environments online.
Norada, thank you.
Thanks so much. This a question from
pji. Uh, thank you Liz,
Uh, for your submission.
Just want to, um, to get a bit
of clarification on the last point you made about, uh,
the issues, anxiety, racism, and all those issues.
So are you saying that social media is not the only
cause for all these issues?
Correct. We're saying it's not the
root cause of all of these issues
And supplement.
And so, um, um, we have seen
that some people have expressed concerns about social media
being a concern, not today in submissions, but
otherwise, uh, so how do you see we can get kind of a, uh,
find a middle ground where we can preserve the benefits
of social media while also we are able
to address these issues where people believe
that social media is the cause for these,
um, different issues?
Yeah, absolutely. So, I,
I think the middle ground is within the,
the recommendations that I've just stated.
So in terms of strong, stronger regulation in terms
of improving the harmful Digital Communications act in terms
of supporting young people with education
and with parents with education, it's, it's,
it's gonna be a, a, a complex problem to fix
that's gonna require all of these solutions to fix it.
Thank You. Thank you. Um, Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you Chair. Um, I have a question around one of the,
uh, recommendations that you mentioned, um,
in your submission, uh, 0.3 around embedding digital
and major literacy in the curriculum.
Um, are there any overseas examples that you can point to
that have done that particularly well that we can use
as sort of exemplars in New Zealand?
That's a very good question.
Not my area of expertise, um,
but would be really interesting
and to understand in the
international research what is working.
Okay. Thank you, Uh, Kira, thanks for your time.
Um, you know, you talk about involving young people in
policy and platform design,
and obviously that's what you do as an organization.
Have you seen any examples of this working in any areas, um,
in New Zealand or in Auckland or, you know, but it's,
but whether it be around social media
or around other things that we can learn from.
'cause I think, you know, a bunch
of us adults sitting here discussing this is really good,
but you make a really good point about
how do we bring out the young people with us on this?
Yeah, I mean, we are big believers in co-design
methodology, um,
and using that as the mechanism to drive, um,
young people being involved in kind of redesigning services
or legislational policy development, um,
in terms specifically in this mahi chate, um,
in Australia has been really successfully done,
um, via that model.
So I would urge the committee to, um,
to be involved with it.
And, and Chats Safe is currently going
through its co-design process in New Zealand currently,
but where it's already been done is in Australia.
Yeah. Can I supplementary, so it was chat safe, correct?
Correct. Yeah.
And then, um, so in terms
of co-design in involving young people, um, how do you,
that obviously makes a difference
'cause it brings young people with
us in this, is that correct?
Yes, yes, exactly. So, um, for example, here in,
we have a program that's called Counseling Your Way.
Um, counseling Your Way is, um, eight free sessions
of support, um, for anxiety
and depression using ACT and CBT models.
That is a program of therapy that we co-designed
with young people to ask them
what do they want and what could it look like.
Um, and we have a, we have some evidence coming out about
how successful that program's been very shortly, um,
that's been delivered by COI too,
who I think might also be presenting
or at least have done a
submission to this committee as well. That's
Really helpful. Thanks. Thanks
very much. Uh, Phil Twyford?
Yeah, Liz, thanks for the submission.
Um, it, it would seem to me
that your submission doesn't really speak to, um, something
that a number of other submit, uh, a kind of a critique
or argument a number of other submitters have made.
And that is that social media has changed in a very systemic
way, uh, life for adolescents, um, uh,
in introducing them to a world that is full of, um, kind
of intense exposure to comparison
and status anxiety, uh, uh, shaming around body image,
uh, and online bullying in a way that, um,
massively magnifies all the normal kind of risks
and hazards of adolescents.
Um, it, I'm not talking about, you know, extreme examples
of online harm or, or so on.
I'm talking about just the basic exposure to social media
for 13, 14 year, 15 year olds in our society.
What do you say to that?
I think our submission, um, does reference that.
Um, actually, uh, back in 2023 when we did State
of the Generation, when we asked them why social media was
one of the things they were concerned about, the majority
of young people said it was about that social comparison,
about the idea that, um,
what people were presenting online was only the good stuff
was an idealized version in
of them in the south in their lives.
And that that was a really difficult thing
that they felt like they could live up to.
But I also think young people are good at recognizing that
that's not real and seeing the other benefits
that social media has in teaching them things
and being able to connect, um,
and being able to find a community online.
So yes, we do reference our own research
and the likes of the classifications office information
that came out and around,
particularly things like body image and social comparison,
but we don't see that concern outweighing the benefits.
Okay. Uh, thanks Phil.
Um, quick final question from me.
Um, in your submission, you talk about 73%
of young New Zealanders use, um, online support
for mental health
or have gone online in different ways to, um, find support
for their mental health, uh, challenges.
There's a narrative coming up, particularly out of the US
around the challenges of, um, ai, the likes of chat, GPT,
um, but being a, a reinforcer of challenges
that, uh, individuals have around mental health.
Have you got any particular thoughts on that as an issue
and, and specific ideas on how we could resolve
that here in New Zealand?
Yeah, I think, um,
although we are talking about online harm
and about social media specifically,
we cannot ignore the risks
and the concerning stories that are starting
to come out globally around, um, ai.
We know from the young people that say contact our helpline
that often they have gone to the likes of AI
and chat GBT first to ask questions, um,
and get validating responses for what they're going through.
But the reality is they're coming to us
because they want to talk to a person.
Um, and they're often saying when they reach out to us,
am I talking to a real human?
Because most of the time it's via text or web chat.
So I think it's really important
that young people do have access to services like youthline
through social media to speak to real humans
and get real advice
and critical thinking about
the problems that they're going through.
Um, and all our young people say that they want, um,
more regulation around ai.
They want more support to understand, um, the concerns
around things like deep fake, um,
and abuse that can happen to them through ai.
So I do think that's an important area of focus as well.
Thanks so much, Liz.
Appreciate your time with us this morning.
Um, it's all we have time for, um, with you. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, committee, we, we now have, um, Dr.
Um, Coney, if I'm pronouncing that correctly,
um, joining us.
And, uh, we've got 10, five minutes with you.
Sorry, my agenda's marked up here.
Five minutes, um, 10 minutes. Excuse me.
10 minutes. Thank you this morning, um,
including any time for questions.
Thanks.
Thank you to the committee for the opportunity
to appear before you today.
And while I'm speaking in my personal capacity,
I am the deputy head of school at the University
of Melbourne School for Computing
and Information Systems, where I'm also a senior lecturer in
cybersecurity and public policy.
And though I'm computer scientist,
I did work in the US Senate where I worked for the senator
who sponsored the Section two 30 platform liability
protections that were just mentioned.
And my team on Child Protection Technologies is from
Princeton, Carnegie Mellon, and Melbourne.
And our current headline project is actually auditing the
age assurance systems
that are going into place in the UK and Australia.
So my prepared testimony presupposes
that others are gonna outline a lot of the harms
to which young people are at risk online.
They're gonna take substantive policy positions.
I wanna focus on the question of which entities to regulate
and how to regulate them if we do.
So. The most important decision we think we need to make
after deciding if to regulate is
where in the technology stack we should
actually put in place the regulation at the website level,
the platform level, at the browser, at the app store,
at the device, or at the internet infrastructure providers.
My team's suggestion is that regulation at the device level
with tie-ins to browsers
and app stores is going to be the most effective
and have the fewest trade-offs in many instances,
in comparisons to a lot of the other forms of regulation.
If a device is in control, purchases
or sellers of the device can ensure
that the device itself is set to identify
that it belongs to a minor.
And this helps to ensure that adults are not
otherwise impacted by any regulatory regime.
This does not mean that you can't regulate platforms in
other ways, but a lot
of the more stringent regulations are
best applied to the devices.
Devices also serve as the primary gatekeeper for access
to all different contents and services.
So if the device does not permit the installation of an app
to certain communications or to certain platforms
or restricts the use of circumvention technologies,
this also provides a fairly reasonable level of assurance
and efficacy with fewer trade-offs for privacy, security,
the cost of regulation to small entities
and also to civil liberties.
This, of course, does not preclude imposing reasonable
duties on platforms,
and I don't want to give that impression.
But we have to also take care
that if we do impose regulations on platforms
and websites that we don't inadvertently
and unreasonably disadvantage individuals
or smaller platforms and businesses who also host websites.
And we've seen this in the UK recently, technologies
that regulators worldwide as suggesting
to mitigate harms each come
with seriously different sociotechnical trade-offs.
And all too often we're finding
that the differing profile in the different technologies
that can be used to regulate is not brought to the fore
during the decision making processes.
And this is something that we would urge New Zealand
to thoroughly consider.
I'm very happy to answer any questions from the committee,
but especially those relating to the design of technologies
and platforms, the risk profile
of intervention technologies, the viability
and efficacy of different types of interventions, as well
as the impact of regulations that we've seen elsewhere.
Thank you very much and I'm happy to take any questions.
Um, thank you so much. Um, are we too late?
Like can we, can we, um, you know, can we sort
of put the genie back in the bottle
if you understand my question? Yeah.
Um, so to some extent we are too late.
The internet is out there, kids are using it,
and there's nothing we can really do about that.
The onerous bands that we've seen in Australia
and the UK are gonna have limited efficacy because one way
or another children are gonna still
have exposure to the internet.
However, there are still a large number
of regulatory strategies that we can use.
And also platforms do have an incentive to try
and make their platforms commercially acceptable
to parents and to kids.
And so by applying the right kind of pressure, we can double
that incentive and actually try
and get these platforms to a place
where the trade-offs are kind of worth it
and where the harms versus the benefits are set at a place
that we find tolerable,
even if we can't get to a perfect place.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you Ji. Yeah, thank you.
Uh, thanks, uh, for your submission
and as in your submission, you have mentioned about
how young people can kind of find ways to access, uh,
platforms like VPNs.
You have mentioned similarly, I was thinking like if we uh,
uh, bring in device level controls, what is stopping them,
young people from borrowing their friends
or, um, someone else's device, uh,
to access social media platforms that they want to.
And then who would be then responsible for that?
How do we kind of navigate that?
Just keen to understand from you,
No system you build is going to be really foolproof.
Children are gonna figure out ways to get around it.
Even if you do like the age assurance systems
that Australia's thinking about, if a parent works
with the child to get around the band, that'll still work.
If they have an older sibling, that'll still work. Mm.
The goal is not to make it foolproof.
The goal is to find the right space in the in trade-offs
of like how onerous this is
and what kind of civilities we give up versus the efficacy.
And the device level thing,
at least from my lab's perspective,
strikes a fairly nice balance between like,
kids are gonna get around it,
but this provides like a watchful parent a fairly good way
to ensure that the kid is, for the most part, sticking
to the restrictions put in place.
'cause for the vast majority of the time,
kids are using their own devices.
So even if they borrow a friend's phone, that's going
to be a limited amount of their use time compared
to the device that devices that actually belong to them.
And obviously as they get older, this will be less
and less true, but then the wisdom
of regulating in a fairly onerous manner
decreases as they get older.
A quick supplementary, so what would you say to people,
those who would criticize this idea
of putting the whole responsibility on parents?
So I don't think it's right
to put all the responsibility on parents,
but it's also, I think, unrealistic to say, well,
the platforms can do this on their own,
and just by having a
technology, we're going to solve the problem.
At the end of the day, parents need to be involved.
And that might mean actually ticking the box when you buy a
phone that says, yes, I'm a parent.
Yes, this is for a kid.
So the idea is to again, deal
with both the technological constraints,
the policy constraints, and to deal with some
of these ethical issues to come to a regulatory solution
that is more than just sounds good.
If we say, okay, it's on the platforms
because they built this, that doesn't mean that just
because we feel good about
where we're putting the responsibility
that it's gonna be the right regulatory decision.
As much as that's quite politically palatable.
Vanessa, Thank you.
Um, thanks very much for your submission.
Um, some other submitters have talked a lot about, um,
transparency of algorithms.
Um, what would that actually mean
and, um, how could it be effective?
So my view is that that's actually gonna have limited
efficacy as, as your question suggests.
So what are you gonna do once you figure out
that the algorithm works in a certain way that might give,
I I, I'm in favor of giving researchers the ability
to scrutinize it so they can understand the harms better,
but there is a limited effect
that's not gonna fix things substantively,
however, mandating that researchers
and public interest organizations have access
to the transparency can then drive
further regulatory responses.
So I would not see that as a solution,
but rather by mandating transparency, you are then going
to give some of the allies to the, to the regulatory bodies,
the ability to help inform regulators
through additional submissions
and additional testimonies where we'll be able
to speak with greater confidence.
So in favor, I don't think it's the solution. Great,
Thanks. Thank you. Phil,
I don't know if you have any evidence to support this,
but do you have any estimate, um, let's take Australia
or New Zealand as an example.
How many, um, parents you think,
or what percentage of parents would go out
and purchase a specific device that, uh,
had device level controls on it for their adolescent?
I don't have evidence for it.
However, by default, the two major operating systems
that account for the overwhelming majority
of phones do have child protection
settings, iOS and Android.
What one could do,
and again, I haven't come up with a specific design,
but you could mandate additional types
of protections being included in the device
that parents can turn on.
And you could mandate that when a device is purchased that,
uh, a user has to, as has
to indicate whether they are a minor or not,
and that certain device protections are automatically
enabled if the user indicates
that the device is for a child.
So it's less a concern about will parents buy child specific
devices and more, how do we ensure that the devices
that are already out there do have these features
and that parents get an indicator when they purchase the
device, that it's very easy to turn on these settings.
Thank you. Thanks. Uh, question for me.
Often when we talk about online harm,
the conversation becomes about social media platforms,
direct messaging, et cetera, specifically internationally,
have you seen any, uh, responses that have dealt
with broader online harm, uh, search engines, et cetera,
more generally, um,
that you think we should be
considering in terms of our response?
So I don't think those regimes have,
for the most part been effective.
There are a number of US states that are attempting to
regulate websites that have content, that has the potential
to harm minors in general,
whether those are sustained past First
Amendment challenges remains to be seen.
And the online safety Act also does have provisions
that regulate platforms regardless
of whether they're social media or not.
But that may host primary restricted content.
I forget the exact terminology.
And in our limited time, I won't go looking for the answer.
I don't think those regimes, uh, meet a nice balance
between the burden that they place on individual operators.
So we've seen things like hamster PET websites
and fixed gear bicycle websites
that have shut down in the UK
because the regulatory,
regulatory regimes are very onerous compared
to the risk risk that these actual sites present.
So a hamster PET website probably doesn't have the resources
to build a sophisticated content moderation system.
So you have to be very careful about having
broad based responsibilities.
Their common law regimes might actually be better suited if
you can appropriately tailor them.
Thank you so much. That's all we have time
for, uh, this morning.
Appreciate you presenting to the committee.
Thank you very much. Good.
Invite David Harvey, um, to the screen now.
David's with us for five minutes,
including any time or questions.
Yes. Thank you for the opportunity to, uh, address,
Sorry, David, can we just ask you turn your, um,
camera on as well, please?
I beg your pardon. Thank you, Dave. Thank you.
Got it. Thank you for the opportunity
to address the committee.
Um, I'm David Harvey. Uh, I'm a former district court judge.
I taught for 18 years in the field of law
and information technology.
I've written textbooks on the subject, um, uh,
and have addressed conferences
and written a number of papers on regulatory, uh, solutions
for online problems.
And my submission is directed, uh,
towards regulatory solutions.
In addition to the work that I did, uh, in addition to my,
uh, judicial work, uh, I was
involved in a consultative role, uh,
with the law commission on the development
of the Harmful Digital Communications Act.
And when I look at regulatory solutions,
there are two possible ways, two possible roads
that you might like to travel.
One is the prior restraint model, uh, which, uh, is a sort
of what has been proposed at the moment, which is kind
of like a ban or,
or some kind of, uh, regulatory structure that stops harm,
uh, from getting to, uh, consumers.
And the other is rather like the Harmful Digital
Communications Act, which is a reactive model, which means
that if there has been a problem, then there is a complaint
and that engages a certain process.
The difficulty that you have in trying to regulate online,
um, material, uh, is firstly jurisdiction.
Uh, we can make all sorts of laws for
what happens in New Zealand, but the minute you get outside,
uh, new Zealand's jurisdictional limits,
you have got problems that also relates to issues
of enforceability.
How are you going to enforce against an organization
that is, uh, located offshore?
Circumvention is another problem.
Uh, and I've heard discussion already about VPNs
and, uh, how, uh, young people would be able to circumvent,
uh, anything that the, uh, uh, any, uh, obstructions
that they might have to online activity.
I was interested to hear the previous submitter, uh,
talk about, uh, restrictions on devices
and that that that has a certain, uh, attraction in a way
because it's certainly localized, uh,
and doesn't arise the raise, the jurisdictional
or enforceability uh, issues,
but every solution it can be circumvented.
Uh, the answer to the machine lies in the machine.
It's, uh, an adage that's been
around the internet for some time.
There has been a submission on behalf
of the Technology Law Committee of the Law Association
of New Zealand, which says there should be, uh, enhancement
of online education and digital literacy.
And that is a particular solution that I would endorse, uh,
uh, substantially.
And it's backed, uh, by a recent release from the House
of Lords of the United Kingdom, uh, who have a number of
what are called media literacy proposals,
or I would suggest could be widened
to dig digital literacy proposals.
And there are three major thrusts there.
One is to embed, uh, digital literacy
or media literacy across the school curriculum.
The second is to demand more from the platforms in terms of,
uh, uh, content control.
And the third, uh, is to, to enhance, uh, digital literacy
or media literacy, uh, across the arms of government.
So those are some very general remarks that I want to make.
And, and, and in some respects have updated the submission,
uh, that I have made.
I think that the problems, uh, that, uh, have been arise,
that have arisen, could be addressed by, uh,
making some minor amendments
to the harmful Digital Communications Act,
a reactive solution rather than a prior restraint solution.
Uh, thank you. Uh, I'm happy
to answer any questions. Thank you, Vanessa.
Uh, thank you very much. Um, I'm interested in your, um,
your suggestion that it could, there could be some
strengthening to elements of the code of practice.
Yes. Um, voluntary code of practice.
Um, what about, um, a mandatory code of practice?
Do you think that would be too far?
Or, um, could there be another way?
What did you specifically mean by strengthening?
Right. By strengthening, I, I believe
that there should be a constant survey
or a constant monitoring, if you like, of the effectiveness
of a code of practice.
Mandatory codes of practice suffer, uh,
because, uh, it means that, um, they're hard to change,
whereas a voluntary code of practice can adjust
to certain situations, new situations, uh, as they arise.
The other thing about a mandatory code of practice is
that you're straying into the territory
of the safer online services
and web platforms proposals of the Department
of Internal Affairs that were abandoned
by the government in, in 2023, early 2024.
Uh, I, I think a voluntary code is much better
because it means that the people who are there have,
have invested in it, uh, and, and,
and have skin in the game,
if I can put it bluntly. I hope that helps.
Thank you. Thanks very much.
Um, David, I think that's all we've got time for. Oh,
I'm happy to, I'm happy to be available at any time
to the committee should you, uh, require some assistance
because I have, do have some expertise in this field. Yeah,
That would be great. Appreciate
that. Thank you. Thank you, David.
Um, now I'm gonna invite Academy Ex, um, on Zoom.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions over to you.
Johno, uh, thank you for the committee
for allowing me the chance to speak today.
And Francis Valentine, the founder of Academy X,
but I'm, I'm coming here as in the role of,
as a technologist and someone who's spent the last 30 years
at the front of the future of work and capability,
but also Academy X just for context,
as a postgraduate institute in Auckland.
And one of our core programs is focused on education.
We've had 7,000 teachers go through postgraduate studies
with us over the last 10 years,
and it's given us real insight into the classrooms across
every school pretty much in the country.
And so that has, has really shown
and showcased to us the impact, uh,
of social media over this time.
Now, my submission is still stands as it is,
but I want to actually more contextualize today into
where we are and where we've moved since that, uh,
submission was first written.
Uh, in my role,
I'm focused on artificial intelligence for the last 10 years.
And I want to just talk also about why now
and why this is more important today than it was even
potentially a month ago
or two months ago, fundamentally for,
to understand the technology.
I'll just give you a quick understanding of
where we are today versus, uh, not long ago.
If you go back to the beginning of social media, we've,
we've two, the idea of social media was exactly that.
To be social and connected to your friends
and to be able to follow people who you admired
and who you wanted to be part of your life.
What happened with TikTok when it came into the market,
it removed a follow button
so you could no longer follow your friends,
you could no longer follow the communities you wanted,
but they changed it to an algorithm of showing you
what they felt you wanted to see.
All the other social media platforms
immediately followed suit.
And this is why we now have this incredible shift
of people scrolling for large periods of time
because they no longer have curated a social connection
with the communities they,
once these platforms were initially designed for.
And so by removing the ability to follow
and actually creating this optimized scrolling feature,
which delivers content, what we have seen now is
that these young people,
or all people to be fair,
have actually become the real focus of a financial model
that is entirely driven by how long you can stay online.
And so, over the time of working with teachers,
what we've seen is the ability for people
to control this idea of a social feed
that actually was their friends
and people they wanted to follow, perhaps bands
and others to now this very sticky
and only caring about keeping your
attention as long as possible.
And what we've seen in the, in the research,
and I know you've seen plenty of research on this,
is the longer you stay on a platform without responding,
the more graphic and the more profound the content becomes.
Because it's assuming
that if you are not interested in the content by liking,
sharing, or responding to it,
that actually you want a more extreme content.
And so the research, again, has shown that as a,
a young child, without actually looking at anything,
but just the very, the minimum effort of scrolling
through content, you'll start to get more
and more extreme, uh, material.
So what I want to talk about with
that at the backdrop is artificial
intelligence on top of this.
So it's only in very recent times we've seen this move away
from conversational, uh, generative ai such as chat, GPT,
where you can talk to your phone,
and I know you've talked about this earlier
with previous presenters,
but actually now to the rise, a very rapid rise
of AI companions.
And so we have now have, uh, young people on their phones,
not only are they looking at this content,
which is not designed for them from the social platforms,
including TikTok and Instagram, et cetera,
but we now have these companions on top of that, if you use,
for example, the example of grs, recent launch of Annie, uh,
at companion ai, who is an anime character.
So she is talking to you
as a character designed for young people.
Uh, and the longer you talk to her,
the more the levels you go up,
the more highly sexualized this content becomes.
It's incredibly targeted towards young men,
but also on top of that, it has this ability
to actually take conversations into any domain you wish.
There are no filters, no guardrails,
and actually they're just the beginning
of this new generation of AI companions.
And actually what we're starting to see,
the development away from just character ai, replic AI
who have already got a history
of a hundred million people using these tools regularly
to converse, to find out information,
not necessarily in the mental health anxiety space,
but as a friend.
And that friend can be on any
definition of that relationship.
Over 70% of all young people are now using companions
of some form in their lives.
So these AI companions have come in in the last few months.
So what I would say is on top
of this submission I put in is just if we don't do something
now and give my view parents the ability
to put some constraint around it, like an insurance policy,
that if you're not enabling parents to know first of all
what the children are seeing and
what happens if you leave them for long periods
of time on screens, we can provide all the health mental
anxiety type issues,
but more importantly, what it does to social development.
And actually the ability to them to think fairly and, and,
and actually, um, be able to distinguish fact from fiction.
And also this effect that I've seen again
and again through trouble to teachers is the Dunning Kruger
effect, which is when you get a cognitive bias towards
what you see and thinking you're an expert in it
because you've been told by what you think is an authority.
And so you don't have enough knowledge
to know, you don't have enough knowledge.
And we see this coming through very heavily in social media.
So I'll leave it there for any questions,
but I think as a timing of the essence right now,
'cause the issues are getting greater
and AI is only gonna exacerbate this issue
as we go into the next few months.
Yeah. Thank you for your submission, um,
about the age verification, which you have emphasized on
that all platforms should be required to do.
How would you then address concerns of,
uh, surveillance or privacy?
Look, I I think we've, it's a trade off
and I think it has to go back to a family level,
uh, where people have a choice.
I think one of the challenges right now,
and I'm a a parent of four, there,
four young people have all gone through this period of time
and looking at that and saying, as a parent,
if I have some ability to go back and talk about the privacy
and, and actually saying, you're trading off.
'cause they're giving away all privacy
as it currently stands.
The data that young people, all of us are sharing
with these platforms and these tech companies is enormous.
We need to understand that.
And that the privacy of actually having some form
of overlay, of checking in with what you have access
to is very small by comparison to
what we're actually gifting to these companies
who can onsell to advertisers.
So just a quick supplementary, so are you saying,
because then everybody, people, those
who are over 16 will have to enter their age verification.
So are you saying that that is a smaller concern?
I think it's a smaller concern.
And again, there'll be ways of doing that
where you can do it by history.
We know that we can see, we can detect well
because these companies can detect with fairly amounts
of certainty the age of the person.
And so there may be a different at platform level,
but I think whatever the mechanism is to,
to prove you're over 16, I think it's a small trade off
compared to what we're giving away without realizing it,
without the knowledge to understand
what we're giving to these companies.
Thank you. Um, Vanessa Ween, uh, thanks so much.
Um, I'm interested in a lot of the, uh, research
around the physiological effects that we're starting to see,
um, both in terms of, um, the, um, addictive pathways
that seem to be used and also, um, the effects of on sleep
and um, and also cognitive impairment and performance
and all of those things.
Um, when we look at some of the, um, descriptions,
they can sound a bit hyperbolic about, um, you know,
this is the fentanyl of, um, you know, AI driven things
as the fentanyl of, um, of online harm.
What, um, in terms of the scale of this, uh,
do you think, um, that is hyperbolic?
Or do you think that it is potentially actually quite a,
um, a good analogy?
I think it's a, it's a very good analogy and,
and I'll, I'll talk about this in, uh,
every year I run events in four cities for year 13 girls.
I've just went, we've just gone through with a group
of us doing that and we were talking about,
we asked the girls to hold their hands up if they were still
on social media after 11 o'clock at night,
almost without exception, at two o'clock in the morning,
still a large proportion of a group
of a hundred girls in each location was still on their
phones, even though they knew they should be sleeping.
And even though they knew they had to get up in a few hours.
The, the addictive nature,
I think is something we haven't really focused on enough,
and it's incredibly hard to get away the same way
with young men in computer games.
It's, you know, it's designed to attract eyeballs
and designed to kind of perpetuate this idea that
of self kind of fulfilling kind of, um,
you, you need to be connected.
And so I think that sort
of the dopamine is not, is a light touch.
I think the fentanyl example is probably more realistic
where we're going because it is designed,
every algorithm is designed
to keep these young people focused
and attention on these devices.
Thank you, uh, Phil Twyford.
Thank you. Um, I found the submission very compelling.
Um, you focused really, uh, on age verification.
Um, I wondered if you've given any other thoughts to, uh,
other kinds of regulatory interventions?
Look, I, I think, um, giving parents some ammunition so
that when they have sit down with their children
and saying, you cannot do this, and this is why,
because this is, this is law of some form
or there is a regulation, it gives parents optionality about
how they want to let their children have
access or not have access.
Just at the moment, if you're a parent
and you, you've got no tools at all at your discretion
to be able to have that conversation
because it's no, it's not legal.
Everybody else is doing it.
It doesn't even enable, you know, young people
to be able to give an opt out.
Like I think there'll be a, a generation
of people we're starting to see of saying dumb phones,
they're wanting to have less social media.
And actually we able say, well actually I'm not using it
anymore because I'm not allowed to.
It's not actually officially legal to do.
So I think right now we have given no tools to parents.
And I think that's, to me is the fundamental difference
where, uh, where parents have a choice
and can have a conversation and,
and have some regulation around the behaviors
and can actually have the backing of a country
or a government to say, Hey, actually you're, you're,
you're on the right course and this
is why we think this is important.
Thank you so much Time for supplementary chair.
No, sorry. No. Okay. Yeah. Moving on. Thanks. Sure.
Thank You. Thanks so much for your time this morning.
Um, we're moving on to Dr uh, Samantha Marsh, uh, on Zoom.
We've got you four, five minutes.
Um, Samantha, including any time for questions.
Oh, thank you. Um, so thank you
for the opportunity to present today.
So I'm a senior public health researcher at the University
of Auckland, and I'm talking mainly about social media
because that's my area of expertise.
And while I think we need lots of different approaches
to address this really complex issue, some
of which I've outlined in my application,
I primarily wanna talk about why I believe increasing the
age of access is necessary
and address some of the comments in other submissions.
So, um, social media is not helping our young people.
It is harming them. We see consistent links to depression,
body image issues, loneliness
and impaired cognitive function.
And if these platforms were genuinely supporting connection,
identity, agency and wellbeing, we would see
that reflected in the outcomes.
But instead, we're seeing the opposite.
So several of the submissions have asked you
to hold the evidence of harm
to a really high standard while at the same time asking you
to accept the benefits at face value.
So I want to be very clear that most
of the research claiming benefits
of social media is based on small, low quality
or cross-sectional studies,
and primarily relies on the youth voice.
Now, I believe the youth voice is really important.
Young people, um,
though have never known life without social media
and often do not grasp how it shapes brain development,
wellbeing, and behavior over time.
So in short, research claiming benefits is often from small
and methodologically weak studies while the evidence
demonstrating harm is increasingly robust.
Um, some people are saying that increasing the age of access
to social media would harm vulnerable groups
like LGBTQI plus youth.
But evidence shows that youth in these communities
who feel they need social media
to connect are also more likely to be harmed by it.
Keeping these young people on platforms
that spread misinformation and enable discrimination
and harm, mental health is not protection.
They need safe purpose-built spaces both online
and offline that support real connection.
But these won't succeed if social media keeps dragging them
back into environments designed to harm them.
It's also said that there's no evidence for raising the age,
but that's not because it doesn't work, but more
because it hasn't been trialed yet, just like many
of the other solutions that have been proposed.
But we actually do know
that age restrictions work in New Zealand.
So when the drinking age was 20,
when new teens still drank Mm.
But lowering the age
by just two years increased harms mm-hmm.
Hospitalizations and alcohol related problems went up.
And the lesson was really clear
that easier access meant more harm.
So importantly, social media doesn't just harm
through content, predators
and algorithms, short form videos, image-based content
and persuasive design also exploit children
during a critical window of brain development.
Social media companies have had years to improve safety,
but haven't and is profit driven determinant of health.
These companies will never make all the changes needed
to truly protect our kids.
And then finally, early adolescence, um,
and teens are wired to seek social rewards.
They have poor impulse control
and are highly sensitive to peers.
And social comparison, education can't change that.
Neuroscience. So platforms built around image-based content
and persuasive design are just simply
not safe for young people.
And while I think digital literacy is an important piece
of the puzzle, it alone,
it cannot protect them from these risks.
So ultimately, I think this is not an individual problem
requiring a nuanced approach.
It is a societal issue,
and we need a coordinated public health response.
The real risk, I believe, is not in delaying access,
but in continuing to expose young minds
to these platforms. Thank you.
Thanks so much, Vanessa Winnick, uh,
Thanks so much, um, for your, um, submission.
I found it really compelling. Mm-hmm.
Um, there was one, um, comparator
that you used when looking at, um, the ways in which, um,
the, uh, social media companies, uh,
and in particular are behaving
and an analogy with the tobacco industry, um,
especially in the, the use of, um, information
and data and evidence.
Um, how would you like to expand on that a little bit more?
Do you think this is a,
something that's happening at the moment? Really?
Yeah, so we've known that, um, you know,
they've been collecting data
and that they've known that their platforms have been
harming kids for a long time.
We know that from leaps data.
Um, but they've done nothing to change it.
And what they, you know, they'll say
that they're making their platform safer,
but what their, you know, their main thing is
to hold their attention of the kids.
And they say that, you know, that the, the, the goal
of these changes that they make aren't actually
to reduce engagement.
Thanks so much. Uh, Samantha, that's all we've got time
for this morning with you.
Um, we'll move on to Dr. Claire Han.
Really good. Yeah.
Um, thank you Claire.
Just before we start, we won't start Tommy, just so Yeah.
The, the time. Yeah. I, I'll keep moving on.
If there are anyone that we want to go back
to grab your questions, we can either invite 'em back
or send them, um, send them written questions.
Yeah. Um, thanks very much,
Claire. If you wanna fire away
Kia, thank you for the opportunity to present today.
My name is Claire Mehin
and I'm a senior lecturer in criminology at
the University of Auckland.
For the past 17 years, I've worked with young people
to gain insights into their digital lives,
their relationships and cultures.
I've worked with hundreds of young people as well
as adult stakeholders across
New Zealand for the past 12 years.
Prior to academia, I worked
as a high school teacher in Northern Ireland.
So the focus of my research has been around sexual media,
including porn, intimate image sharing,
and more recently online misogyny and deep fakes.
So at deep fake is the creation of a sexual image
of a person doing
or saying something that they did not say or do.
So this can be more accurately termed AI
generated sexual abuse.
I'm interested in this inquiry
as my research has demonstrated that young people
have both positive and negative experiences online.
So those positive experiences center around learning,
connecting with others, exploring their identities,
expressing themselves a place to escape
and somewhere to maintain their
friendships and relationships.
Research participants have reported that the internet,
particularly social media,
as a space which allows them voice and a sense of agency.
So some negative experiences
that they've reported include gendered harm, such
as image-based sexual abuse, harassment,
and the increase of AI generated sexual abuse images
and online misogyny.
Now, online misogyny harms all young people
through adverse mental health impacts,
normalizing gendered inequality, limiting girls
and young women's participation, fueling radicalization
and violence, and harming relationships and peer cultures.
Online misogyny isn't just words, it actively shapes
how young people think, fail, interact,
and imagine their futures.
My work is underpinned
by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which enshrines Children's right to education,
privacy protection amongst others.
Now, there's an expectation under Article 12
that adults will meaningfully seek out, engage with,
and respond to the views
of children in all matter matters that concern them.
The U-N-C-R-C also reinforces a broader conceptualization
of children's experiences
and their knowledge about their experiences
as being unique and valuable.
In addition, general comment, 25 states
that national policy should be aimed at providing children
with the opportunity to benefit from engaging
with the digital environment
and ensuring their safe access to it.
Now, to address potential harms for young people online,
I think we need a collective response at tech
and education levels.
So rather than banning social media for under sixteens,
I advocate for rights-based response,
and I strongly support a digital duty of care approach.
So this approach would require tech companies
to regularly conduct risk assessments
to proactively identify harmful content.
And we can see that this has been brought in
in Australia at the moment.
Now, for example, in the eu,
users can submit online complaints about harmful material
directly to the tech companies
who are alleged legally obliged to act on these complaints.
Where a tech company refuses to remove this content,
users can complain to a digital services coordinator
to investigate further,
they can even pursue a court resolution if satisfactory
outcomes cannot be reached.
So regardless of age and maturity
and keeping in mind, these are different things,
this would place the onus
and tech companies to protect users of their platforms.
So other priority areas
of tech accountability include designing platforms
that prioritize safety, consent, and equity by default.
So, for example, having the highest privacy settings
as default, turning off geo tagging as default
and proactive rather than reactive moderation.
I think banning notify apps, so the apps used
to create DeepFakes or AI generated sexual abuse images,
but also the associated account accounts
and IP addresses by blocking related keywords
and using hashes for non AI generated sexual abuse images
so they can't be spread further.
And crews improving transparency in algorithmic decision
making, moderation
and content curation,
implementing stricter community guidelines,
including clear definitions of harmful content of material,
making it easier to report harmful content,
including defining reporting options,
providing age appropriate trauma, informed reporting
and redress mechanisms,
and partnering with researchers, educators,
and young people to co-create effective solutions.
And in addition, and just as importantly to this,
I think we need support
and resourcing for more robust education.
So we need youth focused programming aimed at building
digital resilience and promoting gender equality.
We need critical digital literacy,
including understanding algorithms.
So not just how to use the internet,
but how to behave ethically online,
how your data is being used or sold,
and again, algorithms, what you're being shown and why.
So, for example, digital literacy in Finland is,
it encompasses the technical skills to use digital tools,
the cognitive skills defined, evaluate
and create information, and the social skills to communicate
and collaborate online responsibly and ethically.
And this is embedded throughout the curriculum.
So the goal here is to empower individuals,
especially children and young people,
to navigate the digital world effectively,
to critically analyze online content
and participate in digital society safely and meaningfully.
And this is even more important now, we're seeing the rise
of ai, both in terms of AI generated sexual content,
but also AI companions, friends,
relationships, counselors, even.
We need better relationships and sexuality education.
So this goes beyond just critical literacy.
So this needs to be based upon a rights-based framework,
which covers digital ethical citizenship.
So unfortunately, our 2020 guidelines, which were inclusive
and holistic, have been formally removed.
And the draft framework lacks meaningful input from young
people, plus a disavow scope for conversations
around healthy digital relationships.
And again, the use of AI
or other forms of digital technology in those relationships.
We need mandatory consent education as early as possible.
We need investment in peer education initiatives.
We need to invest in public education campaigns
that promote digital citizenship, consent and respect.
And crucially, we must embed young people's voices,
their leadership and agency in all areas of policy
and educational initiatives.
So finally, it's my opinion
that young people don't need protection from access.
They need protection from abuse, neglect,
exclusion, and ignorance.
They don't not need us to unplug them, they need us
to plug in properly.
Young people are telling us
that they don't always feel safe online.
We need to hear them, and we need
to create safer digital spaces
that honor their voices, not punish them.
Thank you. And I'm happy to take any questions.
Thanks very much. Um, Francisco,
Uh, thank you chair, and thank you so much
for your, um, presentation.
Uh, Dr. Ian, um, I have a question.
Uh, if you could elaborate a little bit on the, um,
the Finland example.
Has that led to, uh, I think better outcomes
for young people at all?
Like you mentioned how they had a program, uh,
throughout embedded in their, um, education system,
but are there meaningful differences in the outcomes that,
um, you know, Finn people, um, go through
after they've gone through that program?
We are seeing meaningful outcomes,
and one of the benefits of the Finnish program is
because it's embedded right the way through the curriculum,
it's not seen as a bit of an add-on.
We know that we have some incredible teachers,
but teachers are very, very busy.
So it's trying to fit everything into the curriculum, but
whenever it's embedded right the way through,
and it's the same with relationships
and sexuality education, when it's more com comprehensive
and it's balanced,
and young people say it as more credible, yes,
we are seeing more meaningful outcomes.
Can can you elaborate on these outcomes?
Like, do you mean less harm? Um, what exactly do you mean?
We're saying that it's empowering young people
to understand what they're saying online
and how to navigate it safely.
And I can send research on that. Yeah,
That'd be wonderful. Thank you. Thank you.
Pji Palmer? Yep. Um, thank you for your submission.
You have listed, uh, privacy as a concern.
Uh, what would you say to, uh, uh, you know, entities
or individuals, those who are supporting ban
and consider that concerns of privacy
and surveillance are actually a small trade off.
What's your view on that?
So my concern is regarding a ban,
the enforcement of a ban.
So firstly, who the enforcement comes down to.
And I think a large part of that will fall on parents,
but also in terms of privacy and surveillance.
So how do we verify this?
So most age gates
and verification technology that we're saying, we know it,
it isn't reliable.
Um, it's inadequate, uh, inaccurate after a few years.
Plus for people with darker skin tones,
it's even less reliable.
So there's the potential there for further digital inequity,
but also it's how much are we giving in terms
of these age gates.
So for example, will everyone have to provide information?
How much information will they have to provide?
What happens to that information? It, how is it kept safe?
So yes, I have, I I think it's more than a small trade off
in terms of the, the privacy situation.
Yes, I think we really need to be thinking about
how our information is used, what information we're saying.
I think with the ban,
and I understand the justifications for it,
but I think it's more about the safe use of what we have
and ultimately how we make what we have better
and safer for young people and for all of us.
Thank you. Uh, thank you.
That's all we've got time for, um, with you this morning.
Appreciate, uh, thank you.
You for the committee now gonna invite clinical advisory
services, um, up onto the zoom.
I think you've, uh, if you can turn
on your camera and your mic.
We have, um, five minutes with you this morning.
Uh, good morning. It says that my video has been disabled
by some at your end.
There. We are checking it. There we go. Great.
Bye.
Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity, uh,
to present, um, this morning.
So, um, I am Marie Iner, chief executive of, um,
clinical Advisory Services, um, now known as Tahu.
And as an organization,
we have worked in the suicide prevention
and post prevention, um, area, um, for the last 20 years.
And the context of our submission, um,
comes from this perspective.
Um, one of the concerns that, um,
that often come up around the mental health concerns
and often, uh, the concern
around influencing suicide
related behavior and social media.
And we want to just note absolutely aware
of those concerns and that reality.
However, it's also important contextually to consider
that the complexity of suicide is an issue
and there are multiple contributing factors
that lead to that outcome.
And social media is just but one factor,
and most importantly, um, the concerns relate often
to very specific populations requiring of
of a nuanced response.
We are aware of the mixed evidence
of the Hans versus the benefits
and appreciate the complexities that social media creates
and sustains in the context of our work.
We've supported communities to respond to suicide clusters
and contagion, including online environments,
and we've experienced in supporting communities, um,
navigate the pros and cons of social media.
In our work, we have also worked
and seen how marginalized groups such as kids in state care,
neurodiverse youth
and rainbow communities use social media for access
to peer support and connection with wider support.
By banning social media unfairly,
young people are bearing the brunt
and the cost of the problem, rather than the accountability
for those who have generated the problem.
It reduces opportunities to connect positively
and effectively with social media.
We consider this going to be unintended consequences.
A ban could encourage young people to use unregulated areas
of the internet and technologies, privacy trade-offs,
proposed age verification technologies are often
underdeveloped and inaccurate.
Freedom of expression, a ban has significant consequences
for the right to both impart
and receive information for young people.
Skill development opportunities, it is important
that we all have the skills
and knowledge, not just young people
to participate in social media use as safely as possible.
We must not overlook the benefits of social media
for young people that young, that, sorry.
for young people, including assisting with education,
social learning connection, facilitating access
to mental health support,
and communities of support for marginalized communities.
Our proposed solutions and recommendations include clear
and actionable solutions.
We advocate for solutions that are proportionate, effective,
workable, and cost effective alternatives to a blanket ban
or solutions that address specific harms.
We recommend co-designing solutions
to increase safer social media for all young people
by having a national co-design think tank on how to do this,
including government, health, education, tech companies,
telcos, and young people to solve the problems together.
Greater prob platform accountability,
exploring effective mechanism for platform accountability,
drawing from global comparisons.
Greater government and public policy coherence are more
unified and strategic pro
to online safety across all relevant agencies.
Increased digital literacy
and resilience education, empowering young people
with the skills to navigate the online world safely
and critically increased parental support
and education, providing resources and guidance for parents
and caregivers to effectively support their children's
online experiences.
The earlier the better increased funding
for support services, including direct funding
to mental health addiction
and other related support services.
I'm happy to take any questions
that select committee might have.
No, uh, thanks very much Marie.
I think you've, um, used the time
we've got available this morning.
I appreciate you taking time to present to the committee.
Thank you. Um, can I now invite NetSafe, uh,
to the table and we've got you with us
for 10 minutes this morning, including any,
um, time questions?
Uh, good morning committee. Thank you very much for, uh,
having me here to appear for you.
My name is Michael De Tom.
I am the Chief legal advisor at NetSafe.
So NetSafe, uh, is an online safe charity
of about 25 years standing.
Um, we are also the approved agency under the Harmful
Digital Communications Act.
And under that act, we have a role of receiving
and assessing complaints about online harms,
and we are tasked with resolving
or seeking to resolve those complaints.
Um, so our submission, uh, is based on our experience
of over 25 years.
Um, we have worked with both children
and adults in the online safety space.
We've worked with other NGOs
and partners globally, uh, in an effort to try
and, uh, deal with the online issues that
we've been facing these past 25 years.
Um,
it's, it's, it's very clear that social media
and smartphones have changed modern life, uh,
not only in New Zealand but around the world.
New Zealand's not the only one grappling with this issue,
but it's clear that we do need to address the issue
and we do need to adapt.
We agree that there is evidence that shows both children
and adults continue to be harmed online,
and that current approaches are insufficient.
We invested enough either in education or in our legislative
and regulatory responses to deal with this issue.
However, we don't think that quick fix proposals,
like aid plans or delays are the answer.
As you all have read and heard,
this is a very complex problem,
and we ought to make sure that we get it right.
Nets safe's proposal is comprehensive and future focused.
We agree that we didn't need to regulate
and modernize regulation in terms
of platform accountability.
That could include introducing clear platform
responsibilities, such as requiring safer platform design
features and reducing reliance on algorithms.
Significantly, we think we can right now
invest in greater digital education, including digital lit,
digital literacy, scaling up age appropriate curriculum,
integrated digital, uh, literacy,
and online safety education from early childhood through
to the end of secondary school.
We think there should be more support
for parents, families, and teachers.
This can be through practical resources to help adults guide
and protect children online.
And NetSafe already has a number
of resources available in this sphere.
We also agree that with others, that we ought
to fund greater wraparound support.
These harms translate into
physical life as well.
And finally, as I indicated
before, this is not a problem
that New Zealand is facing alone.
There are a number of other jurisdictions who are grappling
with this, this vital that we work globally
and ensure that any responses are aligned with
what works outside New Zealand.
I'm happy to take questions. You might have
Ji Palmer. Yeah. Thank
you. Uh, can you, uh, elaborate on, uh, uh,
how you say in your submission about, uh, the, the harm
or the risks that are associated with social media, they,
they will become kind of underground with the ban?
Sure. So we've seen, for example,
with the ban in schools, uh, the cell phone ban in schools
that the behavior translates or moves elsewhere.
So on the face of it looks like you're dealing with a ban.
Children don't have phones,
but we know that that, um, in particular cyber bullying has
appeared in other areas such as through, uh,
uh, the messages that you can write and, and, and documents.
Um, we think if you, if you have a ban,
uh, the unintended consequence is that, uh, children will go
behind their parents' backs.
They will, uh, use VPNs.
They will go to other unregulated websites.
And because it's happening under the
radar, children may be harmed.
And, uh, there there won't be an appropriate response.
Okay. Thank you, mark
Butcher. Uh, thank you
Chief. Thank you for your submission.
I'm just particularly interested in the, um, harmful Digital
Communications Act or the HDCA.
Is it got, have you got enough teeth?
Could that be strengthened?
So the HDCA is in essence a reactive piece of legislation.
So it applies for the most part,
once the harm has already occurred.
Um, NetSafe is the approved agency.
So our powers are to, uh, to receive and assess
and investigate complaints and try to resolve 'em
through advice and negotiation, mediation or persuasion.
But we're not an enforcer. We're not a regulator.
So we don't have powers to compel evidence.
We don't have powers to compel platforms to, uh,
act in any particular way.
Um, so to some extent the, the,
when it came about in 2015, it was a modern piece
of legislation, but it definitely could be, uh, reviewed
and, uh, improved upon.
Um, and NSF has been calling for that for some time.
Um, but it's not the total answer.
It, it's, it's part of a, we would argue,
a comprehensive piece of end-to-end regulation.
Um, and in particular, the,
the proactive obligations on platforms are particularly
absent from that, from that legislation.
Yeah. And I, and I acknowledge that it is the stick,
and yes, you do need some carrot and you do need some stick.
Um, but there's nothing wrong with a bit of stick every now
and again because that if there is enforcement mechanisms,
um, that are fit for purpose,
that actually can prevent further, um, you know,
bad behavior, I guess, if you like.
So do you think that it should be reviewed
or could be reviewed and made?
Yes, modernized. It is a successful piece of legislation.
Uh, but yes, we definitely think it could be reviewed.
Um, there are, over the last 10 years,
uh, it's had one update.
Um, uh,
but we know that there are emerging harms
through things like AI companions, AI chat bots, um,
deep fake abuse and, uh, definitely could be reviewed to,
to address those changes in technology. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Francisco, thank
You Chair. Um,
you, well, not you, NetSafe was pretty instrumental
to setting up the, um, code of practice, the VTI code
of practice, um, in the online
for online safety in homes.
How well do you think that has worked so far?
So, yes, we, uh, we proposed a voluntary code of practice,
uh, the Aldo New Zealand Code
of Practice on online safety and harms.
Uh, that involves a handful, only at this stage of platforms
who have voluntarily agreed to, uh, do things such
as provide trans transparency reporting.
Um, this, uh, this initiative,
uh, was proposed in the absence of
lawmakers grappling with this issue.
Um, we acknowledge that it's not a total answer.
It's not, uh, on its own sufficient to change,
uh, or address all the issues that, uh,
the committee's aware of.
Um, but it is only three years old, uh,
and it's currently being reviewed.
Um, we definitely think there are a place for,
for industry codes, uh, in, uh, addressing online harms.
Um, but it's early days still.
Thank you, Vanessa. Thank you very much.
Um, some of the, um, other submitters have talked about, um,
some of the, um, issues with the design, uh, of some
of these platforms, including the kind of infinite scroll.
So, um, sort of, uh, settings
and the, just the lack of transparency in any
of the algorithm design.
Um, do you think that's something that, um, could be,
uh, tackled through the code
or is that something that would probably require, uh,
alternative regulation?
If you want teeth, then it would require
alternative legislation.
Mm-hmm. The, the code is voluntary. Yeah.
Um, there's no enforcer, there's no enforcement powers.
Um, if the platforms didn't do what they promised
they would do, then there isn't really a, an answer.
Um, so if, if, if, if you do want greater enforcement,
then it would have to be through legislation. Great.
Thank you. You speak in your submission about,
um, additional education and,
and other things that would essentially come at a cost.
How do you think that should be funded?
There's no reason why it shouldn't be funded from the
taxpayer base as per other public education initiatives.
Um, children are required to use technology as part
of their day-to-day education already.
They ought to be taught how to use that
technology appropriately.
And there's no reason why that shouldn't be publicly funded.
Any view on how or whether that should be funded through,
uh, companies that are benefiting from the platforms
that are, uh, in place or,
or available for you that we're essentially needing
to protect to some degree,
That that's a, that's a possible answer.
For example, a social media levy
or a, a levy from on on platforms, it's not something
that we would actively call for necessarily, uh, education
and the issues that children face are not only about,
you know, being online with social media, they could be,
you know, how to use a device appropriately
or ensure privacy
or, uh, appropriate gaming, which is, you know, quite, uh,
a broad set of issues that might not necessarily, you know,
fall at the feet of only a social
media company, for example.
Okay. Hey, thanks for your time with us this morning.
Um, we're now gonna move
to QUT Digital Media Research Center on Zoom with professor,
um, Axel Bruns.
I'd like to unmute, uh, we've got 10 minutes
with you this morning, including any
time, um, for questions.
Absolutely. Good morning. Um,
and, uh, yeah,
we represent the QT Digital Media Research Center
as a globally leading research center working towards a
flourishing digital society.
And we're also part of the Australian Research Council
Center of Excellence, uh, for the digital child
and for automated decision making in society.
Uh, I'm Max Barnes with me, also my colleagues,
Dr. Kim Osman and Dan Whelan Shami.
Um, I will spend this time
to speak a little bit about the Australian experience
with our government's efforts to introduce an h barrier
to social media use, which I think will be, uh, valuable
for your purposes.
Um, and you may know that
that social media ban is very much directly influenced
by particularly the, the book, the Anxious Generation
by Jonathan Hyde, which has also been roundly criticized
for cherrypicking and misrepresentation of statistics,
and particularly the supposed correlation
between youth anxiety and smartphone use.
Um, and in our submission, we link
to a very critical review, uh, of
that in the journal nature.
Um, I think the first point to make is that, yes,
obviously youth anxiety as it's been picked up
by studies is very much real and has obvious reasons,
but those have usually very little to do
with social media use.
A young person in the late teens today grew up in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis.
They've spent their most formative years in COVID lockdown.
They've seen graphic footage
of mass deaths in Ukraine and Gaza.
They've probably lived through at least one flood bush fire
or cyclone in Australia.
And they've got little hope
of meaningful action on things like the housing
crisis or the climate crisis.
So, you know, all of us would be anxious in that situation.
In fact, for young people, social media also provide one
of the very few outlets that they have
where they can address that anxiety by speaking up in a way
that is heard by others, and thereby also build community.
So social media can be a really critical mechanism
for mutual support and belonging,
and I think that's been a refrain of
what I've certainly heard this morning as well.
Um, uh, so we, we have to be very careful, I think,
in regulating young people outta social media in the way
that the Australian government certainly
has been trying to do.
Um, we then also come to the problems
with any technology trying to do so.
Um, and as you will know, the final report
of Australia's age assurance technology trial
came out just recently.
And while it's putting a very positive spin on, uh,
the results, the trial really has been very
much an abject failure.
Um, we've seen that facial age recognition has a margin
of error, which is way too wide for it to be useful.
It cannot reliably determine whether a user is above
or below the age threshold
and, uh, systematically fails in much worse ways
for nonwhite and minority users.
Uh, so that's a massive problem, of course.
Um, alternative to that would be ID checks, which mean
that kids are providing critical personal details
to platform providers
or third party providers that, again, raises severe privacy
and security issues.
And again, systematically disadvantages
or excludes vulnerable users who simply cannot provide, uh,
identification information because they don't have any, or
because to do so would actually put them in harm's way from
abusers and others.
Um, and of course,
and that's something we've heard just in the
last few speakers as well.
Many technologies can also be readily circumvented using
fake information and or VPNs
and thereby pushing a whole generation of users
to mistrust government authorities and engage in dubious
and potentially risky behavior.
So these issues don't have any easy technological solutions.
Um, and even small margins of error
or the exclusion of specific groups of young people due
to ethnicity, gender,
or ability that might result in them are
discriminatory and unacceptable.
It's simply not possible
to legislate non-existing technology to being.
And that's, I think, what the Australian government has now
found very much through this, uh, trial as well.
So what we suggest in our submission,
and that's where I'll end, is
to focus on giving young people the tools
to flourish in the digital environment
that they're growing up in to force platform providers Yes.
To do their part, because there certainly are problems
with many of these platform providers
and the way they operate as well, um,
to enhance the digital literacies of children
and their parents to build safe, enjoyable,
and interesting online space for young people
to all platforms accountable for
how they operate those spaces,
and to create the conditions
for the robust independent scrutiny of platform actions
by government bodies, by journalists, by researchers
and others who have a stake in this.
And yes, that last point is also self-interested from a
research point of view, but there's no critical scrutiny
of social media platforms without a strong media
and communication research sector
and meaningful access to platform data.
Um, we as researchers
and others who work in this space provide the evidence
that intelligence policymaking builds on.
There is a real gap at the moment
because platforms are retreating from that as well.
Um, I'm happy to take, we're happy
to take any questions you might have.
Yeah, thank you for your submission.
So, uh, I'm very interested to know about
how you had described the, the trial in Australia.
So basically it's, um,
I would say an underperforming kind of ban.
Uh, so if I have to look at the risks of, uh,
full ban versus underperforming
ban versus the current situation, we, do you think
that underperforming ban is somehow going to mitigate some
of the risks that we, uh, are talking about?
Uh, though you have not linked all those risks
to social media, but given that some submitters are,
what would you say to that?
I think the problem with an underperforming ban ends up
being that it, uh, creates more, um, danger, more damage
to vulnerable communities than it,
um, mitigates those risks.
So some of the underperformance that we've seen in the,
the age assurance trial, for instance,
with the face recognition technologies, is
that it works far worse for non-white, uh,
kids than for white kids.
And that systematically, uh,
discriminates against nonwhite
kids, and that's a real problem.
So if in the end, uh, you know,
y young white kids in Australia can be online, but
but nonwhite kids can't be, then obviously that's a,
that's a for for from my, from my point of view.
From our point of view, I think collectively this is a, a,
a set of problems that's, that way outweighs any kind
of benefits that could, could be generated
by using this kind of technology.
Um, we've seen the same also with, with kids that for,
for one reason actually we're seen,
we're seeing some differences also between, uh, male
and female presenting, uh, children.
Um, so there's a, there's a whole bunch
of discriminatory factors with these kinds of technologies,
and that, that to me is too much of a problem, um, to, uh,
go ahead with these kinds of technologies.
Thank you. This, uh, inquiry is looking at,
at wider than just social media,
but one of the things that it relates to
around this question of social media
and the ban, which has come up a few times, uh, is often
that's put into the same context, the ban as then being the
platform that has to, uh, deliver the ban or, or,
or ensure the age verification
if the ban was looked at in the context of, say for example,
as a parent, I'm not allowed to allow my under 14 year olds
to babysit, you know, other children under the age of 14.
And as the parent, I'm responsible if it was simply a ban
for, for social media that, for example, we made it, um,
illegal to utilize, um,
social media platforms if you're under the age of 16.
Um, but it wasn't the responsibility
for the social media companies
to ensure that age verification.
Would that change your opinion?
It would certainly avoid some of the problems
with the age assurance technology,
where you end up having a problem then is obviously
enforcing that, uh, to begin with.
Um, and of course then there's the question of the, uh,
the literacy of parents
and caregivers who would then be in a role to have
to enforce that ban at home.
Um, so that would require a whole lot
of digital literacy building.
I think maybe Kim, if I may throw to you on that point,
AB absolutely. Like
we would think that this is just really shifting
it from the social media platforms to the parents.
And I think that that's unfairly on the parents.
Um, we know that there's certain groups in Australia
who will be disproportionately affected by the ban.
Um, this is young people living with a disability,
young people living regionally
and rurally young people who have parents
who aren't confident in their own digital media literacies,
who might not know how to perform, um, you know,
privacy settings who might not know how to, um, you know,
even behaviorally govern these kind of things
with their children are gonna be
disproportionately infected infected.
So we are really asking
that there's media literacy education in schools for kids
that also, that digital media literacy extends out into the
community as lifelong learning for parents
and caregivers as well.
Uh, so appreciate that.
Uh, I'm asking the question
because we've had a couple of submitters this morning
who have referred to the ban being a tool
for parents be able to say something as illegal, um,
and haven't focused on the, um,
age verification component of the platforms, which is
what is often used as a defense as
to why we shouldn't do this.
So I'm asking the question in the context of yeah, providing
that, uh, legal framework for those that want to be able
to say, you know, it's illegal, so
therefore you can't, which has been one
of the questions raised with us this morning.
Um, any final comment on that before we move on?
Um, oh yeah, ab, absolutely.
So I think that what's been missing from a lot
of these conversations has been the voice of the children.
So I know there's been some talk this morning about
co-designing solutions.
Um, so we're actually doing interviews
with young people at the moment,
and I would say one of the big findings to come out of
that is that young people are actually asking
adults to do better.
They're asking us to provide better environments for them.
They're asking us to provide better content for them, um,
and they're asking us to make a safer digital
environment for them.
Uh, so I would absolutely say that anything going forward,
um, that New Zealand undertakes should have, uh,
young people's voices at its center.
Thank you. That's a great segue into our next, um,
submitter, um, which is, uh,
the Christchurch Youth Council Incorporated
who are online with us.
Um, and we have them for five minutes.
So we're not got children's
Online. Oh,
sorry. Have I jumped one on my list? Okay.
There was a nice segue, I thought.
Um, but you'll have to hold that thought.
We're gonna, the Children's Online Safety Society, sorry.
Um, uh, on Zoom. Sorry about that guys.
I was, um, too eager, eager to make the connection
to our, um, next minute.
We've got, um, 10 minutes with you this morning. Fire away.
Ki Tina Koto, uh, Kia, everyone.
I'm Anna Zen, co-chair of four 16.
Uh, four 16 is a movement led by parents, educators
and clinicians, and we've come together
because we see the real harm social media is causing
our young people across our TRI every day.
Now, let's be clear based on the conversation we've just
had, this isn't about excluding tahi,
it's about delaying access to platforms, engineered
to manipulate and addict
until our kids are really developmentally okay to be able
to choose if they want, participate in social media just
as we delay access to the insight, smoking,
alcohol, and driving.
I wanna be clear too, that market forces,
and I think you've heard this this morning as well,
will never drive social media platforms to self-regulate
because these are essentially advertising companies
masquerading as sort of tech connection companies,
the algorithms that they've designed
to keep kids scrolling on their screens for as long
as possible, as we know with really disturbing,
but captivating content leads
to increased eng engage engagement, which leads
to more advertising revenue, follow the money,
and the last reporting period, meta Snapchat,
TikTok collectively earned more than $180 billion in
revenue, which is over 90% of their combined revenue
share folders simply will not allow this business model
to be broken unless they're regulated to do so.
And that's why we're calling for two reforms.
Firstly, a legislative minimum age of 16
for social media access,
and secondly, an independent regulator with real power,
real teeth, uh, and with child safety expertise.
Now, to bring this urgency to life, I'd like to invite two
of our expert panelists, pediatrician, Dr.
Monesh Diva, who's with me today, uh, to share
what he sees daily on the front lines of youth,
youth mental health and the crisis that he's experiencing.
And also school principal Steve McCracken, uh,
who's also online to share his experience from
an education perspective.
And over to you, Manish,
From a health perspective, in the last 10 years,
we've seen a tripling of youth with anxiety, psychological
distress, and self-harm presentations to our ed.
We have overwhelmed wait lists.
We have fatigued and a stretched workforce,
and we have a whole generation now growing up, seeking 24 7
online validation.
This brand new harm that we've allowed to our young people
to be exposed to cannot be solved by more clinicians,
more access to drug funding and more hospitals.
We need to think of solutions
that help our parents protect their kids.
We need to listen to children
who are seeing online harm daily on these platforms.
who are experiencing harms daily on these platforms.
I would urge and thank this committee
for taking this issue seriously,
and invite any questions that help protect, uh, Mo Tam
ran INO New Zealand.
So thank you. Uh, Ian, uh, I understand you're online, uh,
Steve McCracken from, um, ra I should say, uh, school,
if you'd like to also speak. Thank you.
Yeah. Or Steve McCracken, UA principal of RA College,
a school of nearly 2000 students aged, uh,
between 11 and 18 years old.
And I'm also a father.
Uh, every day I see the impact of, uh,
social media on our young people.
Our young people are addicted to the, some
of the most highly addictive drugs,
and that is social media.
The government's phone free ban was the best policy, uh,
that we have ever seen in our school,
and it literally changed our school overnight.
I can no longer run meetings at lunchtime with Windows Open.
Uh, our playgrounds went from silence, uh,
to those most noisy and vibrant places.
Um, but make no, no mistake, uh, the schools that we have,
uh, across alor are left to pick up the mess created
by social media, the bullying, the body image pressure,
the sleep loss, the fights, the truancy, even the trauma
from exposure to violent and extreme pornographic content.
It walks through our gates daily.
We are funded by the government for one
and a half guidance counselors in our school.
For 2000 kids, we employ nearly five, an extra cost
of $300,000 per year.
That's on our school. Why?
Because children are being exposed
to misogynistic behaviors, gore
and online predators on a daily basis.
Once our kids see this content, they can't unsee it.
So please don't leave it to us as schools
and as educators, we need leadership.
We need an independent regulator with teeth,
and we need the legislation to delay social media access
until the age of 16, just as we do with driving smoking
and of course, drinking alcohol.
For us, anything else is failing our kids. Kda,
KTA Question from Ji Palmer and then full
Twi for, uh, thank you.
I acknowledge the concerns,
but at the same time, we also want to see, uh, something
that is going to be practical too.
So very keen to understand from you
because what we are hearing from other submitters is that
by imposing a plain ban might push harm
underground, because nowadays, uh,
teenagers are quite tech savvy
and they can always circum, uh, circumvent the ban by, uh,
accessing, uh, different platforms through VPNs.
Uh, so I want to understand from you the risk
of harm going underground.
How do we find that middle ground where it's going
to be practical as well?
What we do? Mm-hmm.
I can take this question first up
and just picking up the thread from the last on this.
For many of the families we see in clinical spaces,
it's our perception that for a lot of parents
who are doing it pretty tough, there is no appreciation of
how harmful the social media platforms are.
For a person such as myself who's in the evidence
and a clinician, that's something we get
trained on to look at.
But for many parents just signaling
that we do not think this is okay,
we know there are associated harms will be a massive thing
this government could do to help parents protect their kids.
At the moment we see lots of parents
who are extremely stretched
and given our norms are
that there are no regulations on social media platforms
effectively, we have signaled to them that
that is okay when we know it's not.
Dr. Cameron, If I could, my question was,
Um, actually my question was, um,
how do we address the issue of harm going underground?
So that was my, my question,
Dr. Palmer. If I could
respond from a school perspective,
it already is underground.
Um, and parents do not know
what the young people are looking at on their phones
or devices at any time of the day.
Um, we experience this in our schools all the time,
and when we're exposed to things
and raise it with our parents, um, they are astounded at
what the young people are looking at and viewing.
So what can we do? We can put legislation in place
that enforces under sixteens
and social media not to be allowed for our young people,
But then there's a risk, sorry, them reporting
because it's underground.
I'm gonna go to, um, Phil Twi now
given time you've had, uh,
But that was a very important follow up question, Mr.
Sure. So, um, this is, this is also for Mr. McCracken.
Um, so, uh, there's been a lot of submissions about the, um,
the inadequacies of age verification technology currently.
Um, leading me to,
to conclude from the conversations this morning that, uh,
if if there were to be an age ban
or delay put in place, it would largely fall to parents
to implement it, you know, your parents, um, Mr.
McCracken and your and the kids in your school.
How effective do you think it's likely to be if, uh, if, if
that were the case, if that were put in place?
Yeah, parents need a whole lot of support, don't they?
Um, which is why we are calling for the legislation
to be put in place to support our parents.
Um, otherwise it, it will, um, fall over and miss,
But, but would, do you think
parents would use it as a tool?
Do you think they would effectively, um,
enforce it with their kids?
I think that there will be a range of things that, uh,
that, uh, parents, um, experience and,
and, you know, we've, we've gotta be very careful
around making sure that there's not a, uh, um,
inequity balance there as well.
Um, so if we do it at a legislative level, um,
then surely it reverts back to the, uh, the,
the tech companies and things as well as our parent body.
Thank you, Pam. Is time for another supplementary?
Oh, thank you so much. So I, I just wanted
to get some clarification on that
because I agree that yes, the harm is already happening
and some of that might be underground,
but there are provisions for complaints.
Um, but then when it's happening fully underground,
then they will be that, uh, that kind of nervousness
amongst people to complain, uh, to a complaint.
So I want to understand from you,
how do we address that issue then?
Like, things going really underground rather than the way
they're underground at the moment
where people just don't want to talk about it?
Yeah. Uh, doctor, um, Pam, I, uh,
if I may, um, respond to that.
I think there are a number of things, uh, first up in terms
of the way that we can implement this, which was, uh,
a question that was asked earlier as well.
There are different options to New Zealand
and there were in Australia, there's already a, uh,
digital Identity services trust framework.
It was an act that was implemented in 2023, uh,
and there's an opportunity for us
to use age verification credentials
to ensure a very simple way of implementing this.
And the DIA is looking at this right now.
So, uh, I think that's the first important point to make
in terms of, hey, will, uh, children, uh, go round the,
uh, the age restrictions?
This has gotta be a multifaceted response.
It's a systemic issue,
and it's gotta require a systemic response, right?
So the first thing is, yes, we need a age restriction
that we can enforce with age verification,
and we can do that here in New Zealand.
Absolutely, we can do that. The second thing is we need
education for parents and for, uh, for our children.
At the moment, groups like the four 16 are trying
to raise money to educate parents,
but we need the government to step in and do more here.
People like ish, people like Steve who have, who are,
you know, fighting on the battlefield every day
because these tech companies
who aren't paying tax here in New Zealand,
but our kids are ending up in the's emergency department
and they're ending up, uh, you know, talking
to social workers in, in Steve's school.
So, uh, yes, they could
get a VPN kids could get a VPN and go around this.
That's where we need more education about the harms.
And we also, it's sort of like saying, hey, so, um,
meth is really bad, but
because if we introduced legislation to ban meth, uh,
you know, people will still use it and access it.
So let's not have legislation.
We need to the wrong example
because social media is positive.
Some people we are, um, is not positive for anybody.
We are. We're at time. Thank you so much, um,
for the time you've had with us this morning.
Uh, appreciate you taking the time to present.
Uh, thank you. We're now, we're now gonna move
to our segment I was referring to before,
but, uh, the Christchurch Youth Council of Incorporated,
um, uh, joining us.
So we're going straight to the Stratford district, um,
youth council from the mighty Nui electorate.
What team, we've got five minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions over you.
Awesome.
Um, Kiara, we are Tes Ana Hane,
and we are the secretary
and co-chair of the Stratford District Youth Council.
First of all, thank you for your time
and for making the effort to hear our opinion.
Our youth council is focused on representing people age 12
to 24 in the Stratford district.
We've been fortunate enough
to have a really engaged local mp, so thank you so much
for taking the time to listen to us
and we hope today will be a
continuation of that relationship.
We are some of the first funta
who have grown up in the digital age,
and we do truly understand the harm
that social media can hold.
Danger will outwardly a place for sharing
and connections, danger, lurks,
and can quickly latch on to our young people.
Social media needs to be navigated safely and carefully,
and there are ways to do so effectively.
It is our belief that enacting a ban,
much like the one Australia is planning to do in December,
would not prove as beneficial as intended.
In fact, it would make social media even more unsafe
if teens choose to be on social media younger than the law
allows and they come to harm as a result.
The ability to find aid
and address that issue would be incredibly impeded.
Instead of creating a healthy society in which use
of social media at young ages is limited,
it would create an environment
and cycle in which youth are unlikely to ask
for help from those meant to be protecting them.
Teenage years is also
around the time Ranga Tahi begin to get jobs.
And it is at this point
where media literacy is incredibly important.
Living in a world centered around technology means
that stopping young people from accessing a major part
of the digital world would not provide benefits,
but instead negatively impact our youth in workplaces.
Having strong digital literacy skills is vital.
These skills include being able
to use social media platforms.
Not only is social media a place for connections,
it is also a place where enterprising young Kiwis can thrive
from students searching for work, doing odd jobs
or babysitting to young people promoting
media-based businesses.
Our youth have used social media to promote both themselves
and their trades in times where money is tight
for many households across our tu, making it harder
for young people to promote their businesses
and for the to find work can disempower youth
in focusing on their futures.
Our youth also turn to social media
to seek out non-job related opportunities.
Programs such as Youth, Commonwealth New Zealand
and your very own youth Parliament promote themselves
to young people through the use of social media.
To take that away would be detrimental both
to the young people themselves,
but also to the programs instead of banning social media.
We believe the solution lies in education.
The current ways of teaching youth about social media
times are designed from an adult perspective
and often fail to connect
with the reality young people face.
By introducing compulsory age appropriate digital literacy
and social media safety education in schools from primary
to secondary, we can empower future generations
to navigate these spaces safely.
We believe that as a country we can protect our tamari, not
by sheltering them from social media,
but rather by giving the tools to use it safely.
If for the entirety of the education, tamari are taught how
to manage and mitigate the risks, uh, associated
with the use of social media.
By the time they have reached their teenage years,
which is the demographic most, um, risk
of experiencing social media based harm,
they will have the skills needed
to use social media sensibly and safely.
We believe that this approach holds a possibility
of reducing and eventually stopping our young people from
harming others or being harmed online.
This will take time, but it will create a
long-lasting change.
It ensures that not just this generation,
but future generations of New Zealanders will be equipped
to not just survive, but
to thrive in a society built off digital connections.
Thank you once again for taking the time to hear our voice
and take our opinions into consideration.
We are happy to answer any questions you may have.
Thank you, Tatiana, and thank you, Tess.
I've got a quick question. You've sat here this morning,
you've heard some of the other, um, submitters.
Other than education, have you heard anything from any
of the other submitters that you think we should be
considering, uh, to protect, uh,
young New Zealanders from online harm?
I think that NetSafe is really, really key
to helping young New Zealanders in this world.
Um, I think increasing funding
to them would be really helpful.
Personally, I've had digital experiences online
where I've been attacked by bots
and social media to the point I reached out to NetSafe
and they're almost my comfort blanket in that time.
And they were absolutely incredible in managing
to take the account down and solving my issue.
So increasing funding to organizations like
that would be really, really good.
Hey, look, thank you so much for the time you've, uh,
given us this morning for
traveling down to be here in person.
We really appreciate it, you, so for seeing you, you soon.
Thank you so much. Cheers.
Um, we're now going to Havelock North Intermediate primary,
uh, sorry, intermediate school on Zoom.
Got, We've got five
minutes with you this morning as well.
Principal at, uh, Havelock North Intermediate.
And next to me here is Sha Keisha.
She's my, uh, deputy principal.
And thank you very much for the opportunity to, uh, talk
with you all, uh, this morning.
Um, I have submitted a long submission, which, um,
I'm assuming that has already been read,
but I do appreciate the opportunity to share a few more, um,
insightful things that we are experiencing.
Um, first of all, a number of years ago, about five
or six years ago, we started at our school having a whanau
and Community Hui, where we would invite multiple schools in
that, uh, Havelock region, uh,
to come along to parent evenings.
Uh, part of those parent evenings, um,
included speakers from, uh,
the local police child protection team.
Uh, we had a child psychologist.
We had our, uh, police community
and schools, uh, liaison officer, uh,
and myself as a principal.
And we would talk to our communities about the harms, um,
that are out there and the risks that are, uh, perceived
and real, um, in our community.
Um, a huge amount of that was, um, around online
and digital harm and access,
because there had been that massive shift
that's been coming since the last sort of 10 or 12 years.
Unfortunately it was about four years ago.
The feedback from the child protection team was, uh,
directly that, um, by the time it hits intermediate,
we've already missed the boat.
These conversations in the Hui fau in our communities need
to happen way younger, much earlier.
Um, and they were suggesting down around that, um,
year four level, um,
when young people are being exposed online through, um,
their iPad, their laptops, um,
and even, um, smartphones
where young people have been handed these,
um, or access to them.
So that became as a big shock to us.
Um, so as a school at Intermediate Side, that's
where we branched out, um,
and sought, uh, people in the community
to come from an educational lens.
Um, the other thing I note as well, with the change
of legislation around phones away in schools and,
and I understand, um, the reasons behind that,
and there's some success stories around the country, um,
also as a father, um,
and Shayna's also got, um, a stepchild there as well.
We both do sitting in the high school age group, um, talking
to them directly about how they're accessing or
or unable to access, um, online, um, social medias
during the day, whether or not that's been successful.
The feedback was, um, well, it's actually not
'cause they do it on their, their laptops.
Um, so via, uh, VPN, um,
or even having phones in their bags, which, um, they do.
Um, and they can allow access through
to their laptop devices.
So they're still connecting
through the network using their laptop.
And it may appear they're working in classes,
but the social connectivity
around young people is continuing.
I don't know how widespread,
but I would say it's very widespread
'cause these young people are very tech savvy
and they know how to, um, mitigate change
that's been legislated in front of them.
Um, and I guess just to sort of sum up
before any final questions, one thing
that worries me is we are kind of missing the boat there
with many things we're experiencing
with our young people now.
Um, the sexualized behaviors of younger people, um,
and we are at the bottom of the cliff when we come across
many of those, um, includes also the online around, um,
the nudes and video sharing, um, around drugs and alcohol.
The access of that and the use of that now,
um, is much younger.
Um, and also, uh, the online harm
that I spoke about earlier, I'm worried that, um, we now to,
we've gotta try and find a pathway to get to the top of
that cliff as that ambulance.
Um, we can't just be relying on net safes
and counseling support when it's too late and the impact
and harm has already been caused on our young people.
Thanks so much. Um, Francisco,
Uh, thank you chair and thank you so much
for your submission
and, uh, mahi that you, you all do in your work.
Um, one of the things you mentioned was how tech savvy, um,
young people are,
but you've also called in your submission for, um,
age gates and verification.
How do you think, um, don't you think that they'll just get
around that if they're so tech savvy?
Potentially they can.
And I think with some of your earliest submissions, I think
that's where the responsibility comes back to whanau
and parents in the community as well.
Um, it's a bit like attendance.
We know that there's a massive push in our schools at the
moment around attendance and the expectations
that's been been placed back onto parents in whanau
to ensure their children are at school.
Um, and I, I guess the,
the hammer's gonna come down on some in time.
That's what we expect to start seeing from Minister Seymour.
Um, why can't we do the same around, um, the,
the online side of it?
If, if there are rules and legislative, um,
changes put in place, we need to abide
by those parents need to step up.
We can't necessarily do that.
We need a consistent message across, um, New Zealand.
So that needs to be centralized
and all of those messages sent out, uh,
from the government out to our, our parents
and the community say, Hey, we've had enough.
These are the changes moving forward.
Some of those changes are gonna take a, a bold stance, um,
and, and in, in the way that you address those,
but it doesn't mean it can't be done.
We just have to take the, the first step.
Thank you, Mike. Uh, thank you Chair.
I just had a question for you,
and in your submission, you referred to, um, some
of the challenges, but one of our earlier submitters talked
about, um, the impact on cognitive learning
and, uh, attention, et cetera, et cetera.
And you are, you are in the education game.
What have you seen and the trends?
Um, I guess one of the ones we've noticed, um,
quite a bit over recent time, um, is around gaming.
We've got students that are, are gaming
and their upper all hours of the night.
Um, and I also know from talking to some of those students
because it, it affects their attendance,
it affects their ability to be able to learn.
Um, when they do come to school.
Some of 'em are gaming until three
or four in the morning getting a couple of hours sleep.
Um, unfortunately, some
of them are also making really good money off that.
And it's a, it's a change of time.
Um, it, it looks different to when we were at school.
Um, so it's having a massive impact.
Kids are coming to school tired.
If you think of some of the poorer communities in our
country, if they're coming tired around the digital side
of it, plus they also don't have access
to good food like breakfast
and bringing lunches to school, um, all
of a sudden you've got this cumulative effect
of many multiple areas affecting education.
Thank you so much for taking the time
to present to us this morning.
I really appreciate your contribution to the inquiry.
Thank you team. We're now gonna go
to Kay McKean, who's here in person.
I understand. Online. Online. Okay. Kay, there we go.
Uh, thanks for joining us.
We've got five minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions.
No worries. Thanks for having me.
Uh, what I've got
to say has really been submitted in my written submission.
Uh, I come to you as a teacher of both secondary
and early childhood, uh, over 25 years teaching.
And also as someone who's done, um, postgraduate studies,
my master's in neuroscience and education and teachability
and what people need, children need to be teachable.
And, uh, what we've learned from neuroscience is that, uh,
technology, the gaming, the addiction, the social media
is actually reducing students' teachability.
And that's a huge concern to me.
But mostly I'm here to just answer any questions
that you might have.
Um, yeah, so here, I'm
Thanks. Kay. Um,
when I read your submission.
You, you spoke about the impact on young,
young New Zealanders, um, obviously,
particularly in early childhood
and the age verification part, I, I suppose, is gonna deal
with the issue of,
or could deal with the issue
of 12, 13, 14 year olds trying to access social media.
Um, but it's not gonna solve the 2-year-old
or the 3-year-old, or the 4-year-old being given
the phone by mom or dad.
Mm-hmm. What, um, responsibility
or accountability do you think we should be putting on mom
and dad, um, to not give their
children access?
You know, I want to say that education is the answer.
That if we let parents know the harms
and the dangers, that they will then act to stop it.
And of course there will be some
who will respond in that way.
Uh, my neuroscience studies, uh, have shown, uh,
and not my studies, but my research into it, um, reveals
that while we would love to think that cognitive, uh,
change, uh, cognitive teaching people, including adults
and children changes behavior, what we know more is that,
um, teaching only works well that cognitive intervention.
So an education campaign, for example,
to stop people sharing social media with their children
only works where there's a strong attachment
relationship and no addiction.
And so the moment you bring in teenagers
or parent addiction to social media and to online
or, um, then the ability for that education,
uh, and the awareness that our, um, social media
or technologies doing children harm reduces
and the addiction kicks in instead.
And so, um, you know, I heard those young, the,
the high school students pre present
before saying, just, just teach us that it's bad
and then we won't do it.
Um, unfortunately, um, we, we know
categorically from neuroscience,
this isn't just some kind of theory.
This is absolute fact that the, um, attachment,
those emotional powers that
work in our minds are stronger than what we know.
You know, we, we know we shouldn't speed, but we speed.
We know we shouldn't drink too much alcohol,
but we drink too much alcohol.
You know, there's all these things
that we're being taught in our lives
that we know we shouldn't do,
and we agree that we shouldn't do them,
but when it gets tough, we do them.
And, um, when the temptation's there,
when the peer pressure's there,
when the absent parent isn't there, those sorts of things,
education isn't gonna do it.
It needs government control.
And as much as that hurts our freedoms and our liberties,
and I do have a concern about that, um, it,
uh, it's still needed.
We need to be protected from ourselves.
Ji Yeah. Thank you. Uh, we have heard from some iters
that, uh, gaming is also having impact on young people like,
uh, causing addiction, uh, leading
to lack of sleep, et cetera.
So do you support banning, uh, gaming as well
for under sixteens?
Yeah, I, I mean, I've looked at
what they're doing in China with, um, restrictions on that.
And as much as I don't particularly admire aspects
of the Chinese government in control, um, they're onto it.
It's doing harm gaming, uh, particularly for boys.
We know statistically is a huge thing.
And it is stopping their sleep.
It is stopping them attending school.
It's, uh, it encourages gambling.
You, you gamble through games now.
So it's getting people addicted
and gambling financial troubles
and for, for very young ages.
And, and it's a huge concern.
I, I certainly wouldn't be stopping at just social media.
Thank you, Kay. Appreciate the time, um,
you've given us this morning.
Really appreciate your submission. Yes.
Uh, members, we are now gonna take a short break.
We're gonna come back at quarter past 12.
Um, so we'll pause the online and back on at.